
# From Quora

Edward Tufte annoys me because he presents his opinions as universal truth, rarely provides empirical support for his prescriptions, and endlessly repeats a small number of ideas (ironic, since one of these ideas is the sanctity of the "data-ink ratio").

Now that I have that off my chest, I must admit that I agree with him about many things. But here are some areas where I think he is wrong or missing something:

    Good data presentation depends a lot on your audience, particularly what people are used to. If you are used to seeing graphs with the dependent variable on the y-axis (as I am) you'll have trouble when it is displayed on the x-axis (as it is by some economists). If you are used to seeing percentage breakdowns in pie charts, you will find pie charts easier to digest than tables, no matter how much statisticians and self-proclaimed visualization experts jump up and down telling you pie charts are evil. I have no data to back this up (at least I admit it!), but my guess is that being familiar with a particular type of plot has a lot more to do with whether you get it than any elegant principles of design.
    There is no ink shortage. The idea of displaying data with as little ink as possible, like the idea of writing with as few words as possible (which Tufte certainly does not do), sounds nice. But in both cases, it's just an aesthetic principle, not a functional one. Sometimes it's better to use more words; for example, repeating yourself to reinforce a difficult concept or for rhetorical emphasis. And sometimes it is better to use more ink, if it makes a point more clearly, or if it makes your plot more familiar to your audience and therefore more easily digestible. There is nothing at all sacred about the data-ink ratio. Figure 3 from Tukey's "Sunset Salvo" http://www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/~steele/HoldingPen/SunsetSalvo.pdf provides an example where maxing out the ink (and adding a lot of words) says much more than the standard plot.
    More information is not necessarily better. Tufte loves plots that show all the data, preferably in some cleverly dense form, like a Japanese train schedule (this one is from Envisioning Information).

    This goes along with being obsessed with the data-ink ratio. Dense plots look cool, and they are occasionally useful if you need a single plot which can answer any imaginable question. But nowadays we can easily make plots dynamically to answer specific questions, so complex omnibus displays are rarely what you need, and are usually overwhelming and hard to process (at least for me).

Here's one more random example. In his zeal to show all the data, Tufte suggests (in the Visual Display of Quantitative Information) adding some marks on the sides of scatter plots to show the marginal distributions of the variables (this is analogous to row and column totals in a contingency table). Here is an implementation found at Scatterplot with Tufte axes:

This idea has some superficial appeal. But realistically, having two very small histograms of your data on the sides of a plot, one of which you have to tilt your head to read in the usual way, isn't all that useful. The marginal dots are technically informative. But in practical terms, they (a) don't do as good a job of summarizing the marginal distributions as more carefully designed separate histograms would; (b) are not likely to address whatever questions inspired the scatter plot; (c) are distracting; and (d) would require explanation for typical users. In other words, they are sophisticated chartjunk (to use Tufte's term), which in a way is worse than regular chartjunk, which most users know they can ignore.

I am still waiting for a great book on presenting data; one with great writing, lots of effective examples, and real mastery of the underlying craft. What I'm looking for, in other words, is a statistician's version of Scott McCloud's Understanding Comics.